Homework #2
Due: Wed, Feb 1, 10:59pm

How to Submit
Submit one solution per team (each team can have 1–3 members), through TEACH. Put the names and ONID IDs of all team members as a comment at the top of the file.

Your submission should consist of one file named MiniLogo.<your-username>.hs, where <your-username> is the ONID ID of the team member who submitted the file.

This file must compile without errors in GHCi. Put all non-working parts of your solution in comments! If your file does not compile, the TA will not evaluate it.

If you can’t solve a problem, you can get partial credit by describing in comments what you tried and where you got stuck.

Late submissions will not be accepted. Do not send solutions by email.

Description
MiniLogo is toy version of the Logo language for programming simple 2D graphics. A MiniLogo program describes a graphic by a sequence of move commands that move a pen from one position to another on a Cartesian plane, drawing lines as it goes. For example, here is a MiniLogo program that draws a 2x2 square with its bottom-left corner at the origin.

pen up; move (0,0);
pen down; move (2,0); move (2,2);
          move (0,2); move (0,0);
Conceptually, the MiniLogo execution environment consists of two parts:

a canvas rooted at position (0,0) and extending infinitely upward and to the right
a pen which is always located at a certain position on the canvas, and which can be in one of two states, either up or down
The move command moves the position of the pen from one position to another. If the pen is down when it moves, it draws a straight line connecting the two positions. If the pen is up, it just moves to the new position but does not draw a line. The state of the pen can be changed using the pen command as illustrated in the example program above.

In addition to basic pen and move commands, a MiniLogo program can define and invoke macros. A macro is a procedure that takes some coordinate values as inputs and performs some commands. Within the body of a macro, commands can refer to input values by name. For example, here is the definition of a macro that draws a 2x2 square starting from an arbitrary origin.

define square (x,y) {
  pen up; move (x,y);
  pen down; move (x+2,y); move (x+2,y+2);
            move (x,y+2); move (x,y);
}
Now, if I want to draw two squares in different places, later in my program I can call the square macro with two different sets of arguments. The following will draw two 2x2 squares, one anchored at position (3,5), the other anchored at (13,42).

call square (3,5); call square (13,42);
Notice in the definition of the square macro, that we can also perform addition on coordinate values.

The syntax of the MiniLogo language is defined by the following grammar:

num	::=	(any natural number)	
var	::=	(any variable name)	
macro	::=	(any macro name)	
 			
prog	::=	ε   |   cmd ; prog	sequence of commands
 			
mode	::=	down   |   up	pen status
 			
expr	::=	var	variable reference
|	num	literal number
|	expr + expr	addition expression
 			
cmd	::=	pen mode	change pen mode
|	move ( expr , expr )	move pen to a new position
|	define macro ( var* ) { prog }  	define a macro
|	call macro ( expr* )	invoke a macro
Tasks
Define the abstract syntax of MiniLogo as a set of Haskell data types. You should use built-in types for num, var, and macro. (If you want to define a type Num, you will have to hide that name from the Prelude).

Define a MiniLogo macro line (x1,y1,x2,y2) that (starting from anywhere on the canvas) draws a line segment from (x1,y1) to (x2,y2).

Write the macro in MiniLogo concrete syntax (i.e. the notation defined by the grammar and used in the example programs above). Include this definition in a comment in your submission.
Encode the macro definition as a Haskell value using the data types defined in Task 1. This corresponds to the abstract syntax of MiniLogo. Your Haskell definition should start with something like line = Define "line" ...
Use the line macro you just defined to define a new MiniLogo macro nix (x,y,w,h) that draws a big “X” of width w and height h, starting from position (x,y). Your definition should not contain any move commands.

Write the macro in MiniLogo concrete syntax and include this definition in a comment in your submission.
Encode the macro definition as a Haskell value, representing the abstract syntax of the definition.
Define a Haskell function steps :: Int -> Prog that constructs a MiniLogo program that draws a staircase of n steps starting from (0,0). Below is a visual illustration of what the generated program should draw for a couple different applications of steps.

Example output of steps function

Define a Haskell function macros :: Prog -> [Macro] that returns a list of the names of all of the macros that are defined anywhere in a given MiniLogo program. Don’t worry about duplicates—if a macro is defined more than once, the resulting list may include multiple copies of its name.

Define a Haskell function pretty :: Prog -> String that pretty-prints a MiniLogo program. That is, it transforms the abstract syntax (a Haskell value) into nicely formatted concrete syntax (a string of characters). Your pretty-printed program should look similar to the example programs given above; however, for simplicity you will probably want to print just one command per line.

In GHCi, you can render a string with newlines by applying the function putStrLn. So, to pretty-print a program p use: putStrLn (pretty p).

For all of these tasks, you are free to define whatever helper functions you need. You may also use functions from the Prelude and Data.List. You may find the functions intersperse or intercalate in Data.List useful for inserting commas in your implementation of pretty.

Bonus Problems
These problems are not any harder than the other problems in the assignment. They are included mainly to give you a bit more practice writing Haskell functions that manipulate syntax, if you want that. However, as a little external incentive, you will earn a small amount of extra credit if you complete them both.

Define a Haskell function optE :: Expr -> Expr that partially evaluates expressions by replacing any additions of literals with the result. For example, given the expression (2+3)+x, optE should return the expression 5+x.

Define a Haskell function optP :: Prog -> Prog that optimizes all of the expressions contained in a given program using optE.
